---
layout: post
title: Execution over ideas
---

Lately I've been thinking quite a bit about execution over ideas. Not
consciously thinking about it, but rather other ideas floating around in my
head have sort of massaged themselves together into this one central thought.
It is a concept stressed often in technology; one I'm trying to embrace. It's
hard. Especially when there is much to learn and time is so limited.

The creation and planned evolution of this blog feels like an ideal chance to
exercise this concept in the real world (so to speak).

For example, I must have drafted up a first post a number of times. In fact if
I had to tally the number of initial drafts on my hands I would probably run
out of digits. Besides drafting up an initial post I also had the distraction
of choosing how to distribute my thoughts. I tried setting up different
blogging engines and even began writing my own before deciding on the current
setup mentioned in my previous post.

When it comes to execution, there is nothing like being accountable to motivate
yourself. Often a trick played by the mind to distract you from executing is
bringing the quality factor into account. It's often easy to delay doing
something until "it's just right" (a trap I'm frequently caught by). With that
in mind I think a bimonthly post of questionable quality is an achievable goal.
The content might not be relevant or coherently explained, but practice is
ultimately the only way to better yourself at anything.

## A brief history of inspiration ##
Jeffrey Zeldman is a person that I greatly admire on the web. His fame has been
documented elsewhere much more thoroughly than I could hope to achieve here, so
I'll just point you in his [vague
direction](http://www.google.com/#sclient=psy&hl=en&site=&source=hp&q=jeffrey+zeld
man&aq=f&aqi=&aql=&oq=&pbx=1&fp=5e8018494988cd9d).

The reason I mention Mr Zeldman above, it that it is my understanding that his
blog started in an iterative fashion. One that I'd like to emulate. It
literally started with content first and was then fleshed out from there by
adding design and other features around it. An iterative process that over time
has resulted in a blog that is followed by many at
[zeldman.com](http://www.zeldman.com). I personally found that insight into how
he created his blog inspirational, however anecdotal it might be.

## A pat on the back for agile ##
As a disclaimer, it is obvious that I can't lay credit to coming up with this
insight on my own (it is not particularly original). However, the idea didn't
materialise from nowhere. I would like to attribute my awareness of this issue
to having recently embraced agile.

I have really warmed to the idea of agile since moving to [Unboxed
Consulting](http://www.unboxedconsulting.com). I was aware of agile theory
before Unboxed, even seeking to adopt some of its practices. However, this was
more a result of frustration than an awareness of a better way to do things.

With a little hindsight I can see that the thoughts currently flitting about
that I'm trying to express above have been set in motion by my recent
introduction to agile. Agile is a methodology that embraces iterative
improvements, which has been inspirational to see in action. It has been hugely
motivational to see this play out in the work environment and has helped me to
embrace the concept that executing on an idea is more important than the idea
itself. 
