---
layout   : post
title    : A CLUG meet up
subtitle : Future conflict brewing between GNOME and Ubuntu communities
---

[CLUG](http://wiki.clug.org.za/wiki/Main_Page), the Cape Linux User Group,
meets twice a month at the University of Cape Town to discuss the latest
news impacting the Linux world. Recently I was lucky enough to attend a
presentation given on a topic which is currently being heatedly discussed
amongst people in the know.

## Context: Linux? Ubuntu? GNOME!? ##

Linux is an open source operating system similar to more well known
offerings such as Microsoft's Windows and Apple's Mac OS X. Each of these
offers a unique experience which can be largely attributed to each ones
representation of the [desktop
environment](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Desktop_environment) (the
graphical metaphor used by each operating system to represent a physical
desk). For most users of commercial operating systems, like Windows and OS X
there is no option given when it comes to the desktop environment; there is
no choice in the matter and you use what you get. This is not necessarily a
bad thing, but the beauty of Linux is that this is not the case. In fact,
almost the opposite can be said to be true for Linux as you are normally
overwhelmed for choice.  This has often been a stumbling block in the past
for Linux's commercial adoption, but recently with the help of
[Canonical](http://www.canonical.com) (a company started by Mark
Shuttleworth), a recent flavour of Linux called
[Ubuntu](http://www.ubuntu.com/) has become extremely popular.

They have done this by making many choices for users that would previously
have had to be made by the users themselves. This is not to say that the
customisability and power of Linux has been removed from Ubuntu, but rather
the whole experience has been made far more approachable for the regular
user, whilst still giving the expert flexibility and choice. Since having
recently moved to Mac OS X myself, I can say that both offer an equally
compelling experience for all spectrums of users, regardless of computer
literacy.

One of the major decisions that Ubuntu takes on the users behalf, is which
desktop environment to present. As far as I am aware, this has historically
been [GNOME](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNOME) (arguably Linux's most
popular desktop environment next to
[KDE](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/KDE_Plasma_Workspaces)), but recently,
Ubuntu have begun to build their own desktop environment based on GNOME
called Unity, which is becoming Ubuntu's de facto desktop environment. The
current netbook edition of Ubuntu (10.10) already uses Unity by default and
the upcoming release of Ubuntu's flagship desktop edition (11.04) will use
it too, completing the transition away from GNOME to Unity. Canonical's
decision to develop Unity rather than putting effort into improving GNOME
has been viewed as controversial and seems to be driving a wedge between the
two communities, causing uncooperative behavior where previously there was a
collective effort towards a single vision. This decision and the
ramifications thereof is the topic of contention to be discussed at this
particular CLUG meetup.

## Our story begins this fateful evening ... ##

... down in the seminar room of UCT's Chemical Engineering Building, where a
projector screen makes its slow ascent into its resting position behind
speaker Phil Bull. There is a palpable anticipation in the air as we await
the final few stragglers. During this time we settle into comfortable
seating, some of us descending into a world consisting of the content being
served up by our smartphones, whilst others talk of the evening ahead.
Although it has not yet begun, plans are already being made to further
discuss the presentation over food and beer later in the evening. Just then
an attendee rocks up in a Darth Vader mask and takes a seat. I begin to
wonder to myself if this is acceptable attire for CLUG members. No one pays
attention to the new arrival so I guess it is safe to assume that anything
goes. I start to feel quite at home as the geekiness of the moment starts to
envelop me and it is at this point that I'm glad to have discovered such a
group.

The talk begins and Phil Bull, an astrophysics PhD student from the
University of Cambridge, introduces himself. The topic for tonight is the
widening rift between the GNOME and Unity communities. It is discussed from
Phil's unique perspective as an open source community member who contributes
to both projects in the form of much needed documentation. From his vantage
point, Phil can see the worrying extent to which the communities are
becoming fractured, and just how hard this is going to make it for
developers to maintain applications that work on both platforms.

Personally he is finding it more difficult to sustain his level of
contributions to both projects as the two communities' ideologies continue
to diverge, and he seems to be coming to the sad conclusion that working on
both will not be sustainable in the future. The tone of his presentation
paints a seemingly bleak future for Linux and the end user experience that
it offers, not to mention the difficulties facing developers and other
contributors looking to build on the good work done by others. It's
fascinating to see that the open source world is plagued by similar issues
to those found in the commercial equivalent.

Phil's talk ends with a well deserved round of applause. He comes across as
an amicable person who is extremely passionate about what he does, and he
has a genuine concern about the well being of all parties involved in this
latest open source conflict.

It is time for questions and although his presentation was unbiased and
non-inflammatory, Phil still jokingly warns us that he is not here to entice
a flame war. The questions posed to Phil are challenging indeed, but one of
the most interesting to me is to find out which path he will choose
considering he made it clear that he can't work on both projects. His
decision - GNOME. Sorry Canonical, but you seem to have lost a good man due
to what sounds like a spiteful insistence to split the efforts of the
community. Another challenging question arrives in the form of a request to
further justify Canonical's reasoning for their actions. Some in the crowd
are unsatisfied with Phil's earlier explanation given during his
presentation, feeling it didn't fully explain Canonical's seemingly
aggressive move.

## Ubuntu, I am your father ##

"I think I would be better able to provide satisfactory answers to that
question" quips a voice punctuated by heavy breathing from the Darth Vader
mask, which is removed to reveal none other than Mark Shuttleworth! My
timing in attending a CLUG session could not have been better as excitement
is now at fever pitch ... or perhaps that's just me and this is just a day
in the life of a CLUG member, as everyone seems to look suitably
unimpressed. At least the mask-wearing enigma now makes sense to me. Not
wanting to sway the direction of Phil's talk with his presence, Shuttleworth
donned the mask in order to hear the thoughts of the community.

Shuttleworth's mind operates on a level far more advanced than mine and
combined with my lack of background knowledge on the subject I find it
difficult to keep up, however, his answers are well explained and eloquently
expressed, allowing me to keep abreast of the debate. I am instantly
convinced by his arguments and happily forgive him and Canonical of any
potential wrongdoing, but of course the rest of the crowd was not going to
let him off that lightly and further challenging questions are flung his
way. Shuttleworth doesn't miss a beat in answering any of them, and the
impression I get from his answers is that they are all personal and not just
a representation of his company's position. He is questioned on many diverse
topics: the legal implications of the software licences that Canonical
employs (which seem to deprive contributors of their right to own the
intellectual property created by their contributions); his opinion on the
split in the community and why it came about; Canonicals apparent lack of
giving back to the community they are only too happy to take from; and many
others.

From my position as a completely neutral observer overlooking the
discussion, I notice the dichotomy that exists between Shuttleworth and his
contemporaries. The personalities in the room could not be more polar in
nature. Although his peers are equally impassioned and intelligent,
Shuttleworth comes across as a powerhouse, full of confidence and conviction
in what he is doing.

As the debate rages I reflect on how incredibly smart and enthusiastic this
room of people are. Here I am, having fumbled my way into a seminar room at
the tip of Africa, which consists of one of the most influential people in
open source, battling it out against his equally bright and passionate
grassroots contemporaries. Although there are conflicting opinions and
seemingly unresolvable arguments, I feel safe in the knowledge that open
source can only become stronger with people of this calibre involved in its
creation and direction.

## Final thoughts ##

Although I may not have fully comprehended the entire debate, it was
undoubtedly fascinating. If you are looking for a far more coherent
explanation of Phil's frustrations, check out [his own blog
post](http://philbull.livejournal.com/58459.html) on the matter. There are
also some fiery comments to his post that are worth a read to see the debate
in action. Further commentary on Phil's presentation can be found in the
CLUG mailing list archives
([Feb](http://lists.clug.org.za/pipermail/clug-chat/2011-February/027058.html),
[Mar](http://lists.clug.org.za/pipermail/clug-chat/2011-March/027075.html))
where the discussion also continues. If your appetite is still not satiated,
a Google search for [GNOME Shell vs.
Unity](http://www.google.com/search?sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8&q=gnome+shell+vs+unity)
should do the trick.

I would highly recommend attending a CLUG event if you
happen to live in Cape Town or are just visiting. The members are friendly
and the topics extremely interesting.
