---
layout: post
title: A CLUG meet up - Future conflict brewing between GNOME and Ubuntu communities
---

CLUG, the Cape Linux User Group, meets twice a month at the University of
Cape Town to discuss the latest news affecting the Linux world. I was lucky
enough to attend a presentation given on a topic which is currently being
discussed heatedly amongst people in the know.

## Context: Linux? Ubuntu? GNOME!? ##

Linux is an open source operating system similar to more well known
offerings such as Microsoft's Windows and Apple's Mac OS X. Each of these
offers a unique experience which can be largely attributed to each ones
representation of the desktop environment (the graphical metaphor used by
each operating system to represent a physical desk). For most users of
commercial operating systems such as Windows and OS X there is no option
given when it comes to the desktop environment. There is no choice and you
use what you get. This is not necessarily a bad thing, but the beauty of
Linux is that this is not the case. In fact almost the opposite can be said
to be true. You are overwhelmed for choice. This has often been a stumbling
block in the past for Linux's commercial adoption, but recently with the
help of Canonical (a company started by Mark Shuttleworth [TODO: citation
needed]), a recent flavour of Linux called Ubuntu has become extremely popular.

They have done this by making many choices for users that would previously
have had to have been made by the users themselves. This is not to say that
the customisability and power of Linux has been removed from Ubuntu, but
rather the whole experience has been made far more approachable for the
regular user, whilst still giving the expert flexibility and choice. Since
having recently moved to Mac OS X myself, I can say that both offer an
equally compelling experience for all spectrums of users, regardless of
computer literacy.

One of the major decisions that Ubuntu takes on the users behalf, is which
desktop environment to present. As far as I am aware, this has historically
always been GNOME (arguably Linux's most popular desktop environment next to
KDE), but recently, Ubuntu have begun to build their own based on GNOME
called Unity, which has now become Ubuntu's defacto desktop environment
[TODO: citation needed]. Canonical's decision to develop Unity rather than
putting effort into improving GNOME has been viewed as controversial and
seems to be driving a wedge between the two communities, causing
uncooperative behavior where previously there was a collective effort
towards a single vision. This decision and the ramifications thereof is the
topic of contention to be discussed at this particular CLUG meetup.

## Our story begins this fateful evening ... ##

... down in the seminar room of UCT's Chemical Engineering Building, where a
projector screen makes its slow ascent into its resting position behind
speaker Phil Bull. There is a palpable anticipation in the air as we await
the final few stragglers. During this time we settle into comfortable
seating, some of us descending into a world consisting of the content being
served up by our smartphones, whilst others talk of the evening ahead.
Although it has not yet begun, plans are already being made to further
discuss the presentation over food and beer later in the evening. Just then
an attendee rocks up in a Darth Vader mask and takes a seat. I begin to
wonder to myself if this is acceptable attire for CLUG members. No one pays
attention to the new arrival so I guess it is safe to assume that anything
goes. I start to feel quit at home as the geekiness of the moment starts to
envelop me and it is at this point that I'm glad to have discovered such a
group.

The talk begins and Phil Bull, an astrophysics PhD student from the
University of Cambridge, introduces himself. The topic for tonight is the
widening rift between the GNOME and Unity communities. It is discussed from
Phil's unique perspective as an open source community member who contributes
to both projects in the form of much needed documentation. From his vantage
point, Phil can see the worrying extent to which the communities are
becoming fractured, and just how hard this is going to make it for
developers to maintain applications that work on both platforms.

Personally he is finding it more difficult to sustain his level of
contributions to both projects over time as the two community's ideologies
continue to diverge, and he seems to be coming to the sad conclusion that
working on both will not be sustainable in the future. The tone of his
presentation paints a seemingly bleak future for Linux and the end user
experience it offers, not to mention the difficulties facing developers and
other contributors looking to build on the good work of others. It's
fascinating to see that the open source world is plagued by similar issues
to those found in the commercial equivalent.

Phil's talk ends with a well deserved round of applause. He comes across as
an amicable person who is extremely passionate about what he does. He has a
genuine concern about the well being of all parties involved in this latest
open source conflict.

It is time for questions and although his presentation was unbiased and
non-inflammatory, Phil still jokingly warns us that he is not here to entice
a flame war. The questions posed to Phil are challenging indeed, but one of
the most interesting to me is to find out which path he will choose
considering he made it clear that he can't work on both projects. His
decision - GNOME. Sorry Canonical, but you seem to have lost a good man due
to what sounds like a spiteful insistence to split the efforts of the
community. Another challenging question arrives in the form of a request to
further justify Canonical's reasoning for their actions. Some in the crowd
are unsatisfied with Phil's earlier explanation given during his
presentation, feeling it didn't fully explain Canonical's seemingly
aggressive move.

## Ubuntu, I am your father ##

"I think I would be better able to provide satisfactory answers to that
question" quips a voice punctuated by heavy breathing from the Darth Vader
mask, which is removed to reveal none other than Mark Shuttleworth! My
timing in attending CLUG could not have been better as excitement is now at
fever pitch ... or perhaps that's just me and this is just a day in the life
of a CLUG member, because everyone seems to look suitably unimpressed. At
least the mask-wearing enigma now makes sense to me. Not wanting to sway the
direction of Phil's talk with his presence, Shuttleworth donned the mask in
order to hear the thoughts of the community.

Shuttleworth's mind operates on a level far advanced from mine and combined
with my lack of background knowledge on the subject I find it hard to keep
up, but suffice to say his answers are well explained and eloquently
expressed. I am instantly convinced by his arguments and happily forgive him
and Canonical of any potential wrongdoing, but of course the rest of the
crowd was not going to let him off that lightly and further challenging
questions are flung his way. Shuttleworth doesn't miss a beat in answering
any of them, and the impression I get from his answers is that they are all
personal and not just a representation of his company's position. He is
questioned on many diverse topics: the legal implications of the software
licences that Canonical employs (which seem to deprive contributors of their
right to own the intellectual property created by their contributions); his
opinion on the split in the community and why it came about; Canonicals
apparent lack of giving back to the community they are only too happy to
take from; and many others.

From my position as a completely neutral observer overlooking the
discussion, I notice the dichotomy that exists between Shuttleworth and his
contemporaries. The personalities in the room could not be more polar in
nature. Although his peers are equally impassioned and intelligent,
Shuttleworth comes across as a powerhouse, full of confidence and conviction
in what he is doing.

As the debate rages I reflect on how incredibly smart and enthusiastic this
room of people are. Here I am, having fumbled my way into a seminar room at
the tip of Africa, which consists of one of the most influential people in
open source, battling it out against his equally bright and passionate
grassroots contemporaries. Although there are conflicting opinions and
seemingly unresolvable arguments, I feel safe in the knowledge that open
source can only become stronger with people of this calibre involved in its
creation and direction.

## Final thoughts ##

Although I may not have fully comprehended the entire debate, it was
undoubtedly fascinating. Should you wish to find out more the fist place to
look for commentary would be the CLUG mailing list/website [insert link to
mailing list archive here] where the debate continues. Further information
on the topics discusses at CLUG during this presentation can be found here
[more linkage]. I would highly recommend attending a CLUG event if you
happen to live in Cape Town or are just visiting. The members are friendly
and the topics extremely interesting.
