---
layout: post
title: Execution over ideas
---

Lately I've been thinking quite a bit about execution over ideas. Not
consciously thinking about it, but rather other ideas floating around in my
head have sort of massaged themselves together into this one central thought.
It is a concept stressed often in technology; one I'm trying to embrace. It's
hard. Especially when there is much to learn and time is so limited.

The creation and planned evolution of this blog feels like an ideal chance to
exercise this concept in the real world (so to speak).

For example, I must have drafted up a first blog post a number of times. In
fact, if I had to tally the number of initial drafts on my hands I would
probably run out of digits. Besides drafting up an initial post, I also had the
distraction of choosing how to distribute my thoughts. I tried setting up
different blogging engines and even began writing my own one before deciding on
the current setup mentioned in my previous post.

## Accountability ##

When it comes to execution, there is nothing better than being accountable in
order to motivate yourself. Often taking into account "the quality factor" is a
trick that the mind plays to distract you from executing. It's often easy to
delay doing something until "it's just right" (a trap I'm frequently caught
by). With that in mind I think a bi-monthly post of questionable quality is an
achievable goal. The content might not be relevant or coherently explained, but
practice is ultimately the only way to better yourself at anything.

## A brief history of inspiration ##

Jeffrey Zeldman is a person that I greatly admire on the web. His fame has been
documented elsewhere much more thoroughly than I could hope to achieve here, so
I'll just point you in his [vague
direction](http://www.google.com/#sclient=psy&hl=en&site=&source=hp&q=jeffrey+zeld
man&aq=f&aqi=&aql=&oq=&pbx=1&fp=5e8018494988cd9d).

The reason I mention Mr Zeldman above is that it is my understanding that his
blog started in an iterative fashion, one that I'd like to emulate. It
literally started with content first and was then fleshed out from there by
adding design and other features around it. An iterative process that over time
has resulted in a blog that is followed by many at
[zeldman.com](http://www.zeldman.com). I personally found that particular
insight into how he created his blog inspirational, however anecdotal it might
be. It is an approach that fully embraces execution over ideas. Looks like it
works pretty well.
