---
layout: post
title: Vimux
---

Recently, thanks to
[tmux](http://robots.thoughtbot.com/post/2166174647/love-hate-tmux), I have
been enjoying the experience of having the majority of my development toolset
consolidated within a single terminal window, which provides me with a common,
distraction-free work environment.

During Rails development I work almost exclusively within this workspace, but
for some reason I have been reluctant to leave MacVim behind and transition
fully to a text-only environment. Iâ€™m not sure of the cause of this reluctance
as I don't take advantage of any of the extra features provided by MacVim so I
eventually took the plunge and started to use terminal vim. I've really enjoyed
the experience so far, but today I believe I have found a tool that will make
it difficult to go back.

If you use [vim](http://www.vim.org/) and [tmux](http://tmux.sourceforge.net/)
then I would highly recommend installing
[vimux](https://github.com/benmills/vimux). It is a fantastic vim plugin that
allows you to send commands from within vim to another tmux pane in the same
window, creating it if it doesn't exist. One use case of this is to execute the
current spec file that you are working on in vim in a new tmux pane and then
whilst it runs you are free to navigate the file within vim. That is just one
example and if it is not a clear enough explanation of the potential of vimux
may I suggest the
[readme](https://github.com/benmills/vimux/blob/master/README.mkd) which shows
some great examples of how it can be used. However, I read the readme and
wasn't immediately convinced so do yourself a favour and just install it. Copy
the
[keybindings](https://github.com/benmills/vimux/blob/master/README.mkd#full-keybind-example)
into your .vimrc and just give it a try. It's great!

As there aren't any details in this post about my actual terminal configuration
and tools, feel free to get in touch if you would like to know more about my
current setup.
