CLUG meet up - Future conflict brewing between GNOME and Ubuntu communities
===========================================================================

The slow, grating ascent of the projector screen sliding into its resting
position behind speaker Phil Bull inspires awkwardness the likes of which
Ricky Gervais would be proud to have created. There is a palpable
anticipation in the air as we wait for the final few stragglers to arrive so
that Phil can start his talk. During this time the awkwardness subsides
slightly as most of us settle into the comfortable seating of the seminar
room and descend into a world that consists of just the content being served
up by our smartphones. This gives me reason to segue to an interesting side
note; the guy in front of me has an iPhone 4 which is getting two bars of
signal (albeit without applying the death grip). This, in comparison to my
3GS's zero bars, down in the cozy recess of the Chemical Engineering
Building's Seminar Room at UCT is quite impressive.

OK, back on topic and the evening ahead is being discussed. Some of the
group are heading out after the talk for food and beer to carry on the
conversation (which has yet to start). An attendee rocks up in a Darth Vader
mask. I begin to wonder to myself if this is the modus operandi of choice
for CLUG. I can't help but smile as the extent of the pure geekiness of the
moment starts to sink in. It is at this point that I'm glad to have
discovered a group such as this. I feel quite at home.

It's quite enjoyable to hunker down here in the back tapping away quietly on
my phone trying to document the event. Being in a not too sociable mood this
evening doesn't appear to be an issue at all.

The talk begins and Phil Bull introduces himself. He is an astrophysics PhD
student from the University of Cambridge. The talk is fascinating and
consists of Phil's position in the community that sees him torn between
contributing to either GNOME or Ubuntu as it is no longer sustainable to do
both given the two communities diverging ideologies. During his talk there
are a few joking warnings that the chosen content is not meant to entice a
flame war (although I'm hoping to some degree it does).

It seems that Phil Bull's anxiety can largely be attributed to his concern
for developers and the splintered environment being offered to them as GNOME
and Ubuntu continue to diverge. Phil is a documentation contributor for both
projects. This gives him a unique perspective on just how fractured the
communities are becoming and how hard it is going to be for developers to
maintain applications that work on both platforms.

The tone of the conversation paints a seemingly bleak future for Linux and
the user experience it offers to the end user, not to mention the
difficulties facing developers and other contributors looking to build on
the good work of others.

It's fascinating to see that the open source world is plagued by similar
issues to those found in the commercial equivalent. It's not all long hair,
daisies and tie-died attire; there are some extremely heated battles raging
on.

Phil's talk ends with a well deserved round of applause. He comes across as
an amicable person who is extremely passionate about what he does. He has a
genuine concern about the well being of all parties involved in this latest
open source conflict.

It's time to grill the guest speaker and Phil is posed some challenging
questions. Of most interest to me is which path will he choose considering
he made it clear that he can't work on both projects. His decision - GNOME.
Sorry Canonical, but you seem to have lost a good man due to what sounds
like a spiteful insistence to split the efforts of the community.

Phil's explanation of Canonical's reasons to do what they did is questioned.
Some in the crowd are unsatisfied that the stated reasons are all that
explain their seemingly aggressive move.

It is at this point that things really become interesting. The man in the
Darth Vader masks pipes up before Phil has a chance to answer, quipping that
he might be more able to provide satisfactory answers. The Darth Vader mask
is removed to reveal none other than Mark Shuttleworth! My timing in
attending CLUG could not have been better. Or perhaps this is just a day in
the life of a CLUG member, because everyone is trying to look suitably
unimpressed.

I should have clicked that something was strange about our Vader. The fancy
shirt, expensive watch and shiny cuff links (along with the olive
complexion) should have been a complete giveaway considering the topic of
discussion. The mask makes sense now. Not wanting to sway the direction of
Phil's talk with his presence, but still wanting to hear the thoughts of the
community, the mask was donned. Shuttleworth's presence is almost superhero
like.

Despite the heroic manner in which he appeared, people are not letting
Shuttleworth off lightly. He is being posed some very challenging questions
indeed, but does not miss a beat in answering any of them. The impression I
get from his answers is that they are all personal and not just a
representation of his companies position.

He is questioned on many diverse topics: the legal implications of the
software licences that Canonical employs (which seem to deprive contributors
of their write to own the intellectual property created by their
contributions); his opinion on the split in the community and why it came
about; Canonicals apparent lack of giving back to the community they are
only too happy to take from; and many others.

As I look upon the conversation as a completely neutral observer I notice
the dichotomy that exists between Shuttleworth and his contemporaries. The
personalities in the room could not be more polar in nature. Shuttleworth is
a powerhouse, full of confidence and conviction in what he is doing.  His
peers are equally impassioned and intelligent, but Shuttleworth is
domineering. Not in a bad way. He just oozes confidence and belief in his
actions. He definitely appears to be fighting an underlying conflict. He is
trying to resolve his current actions with the expressed feelings of the
other people in the room with whom I am positive he empathises with.

As the debate rages I reflect on how incredibly smart and enthusiastic this
room of people is. Here I am, having fumbled my way into a lecture theater
at the tip of Africa. The room consists of one of the most influential
people in open source, battling it out against his equally bright and
passionate grassroots contemporaries. Although there are conflicting
opinions and seemingly unresolvable arguments, I feel safe in the knowledge
that open source can only become stronger with people of this calibre
involved in its creation and direction.
