CLUG meet up - Future conflict brewing between GNOME and Ubuntu communities
===========================================================================

### Context ###

CLUG, the Cape Linux User Group meets twice a month to discuss the latest
news affecting the Linux world. I was lucky enough to attend a presentation
given on a topic which is currently being discussed heatedly amongst people
in the know. I have just reread this story and realised without any
background it makes little sense, so below some brief context.

Linux is an open source operating system similar to more well known
offerings such as Microsoft's Windows and Apples Mac OS X. Each of these
offers a unique experience which can be largely attributed to each ones
representation of the desktop environment (the graphical metaphor used by
each operating system to represent a physical desk). For most users of
commercial operating systems such as Windows and OS X there is no option
given when it comes to the desktop environment. There is no choice and you
use what you get. This is not necessarily a bad thing, but the beauty of
Linux is that this is not the case. In fact almost the opposite can be said
to be true. You are overwhelmed for choice. This has often been a stumbling
block in the past for Linux's commercial adoption, but recently with the
help of Canonical (a company started by Mark Shuttleworth [TODO: citation
needed]), a new flavour of Linux called Ubuntu has become extremely popular.

How popular you might ask. Well I'm too lazy to research and provide
figures, but suffice to say my dad uses it without much hassle. OK he only
really uses Gmail, but still, I think it's a strong argument. 

They have done this by making many choices for users that would previously
have had to have been made by the users themselves. This is not to say that
the customisability and power of Linux has been removed, but rather the
whole experience has been made far more approachable for the regular user,
whilst still giving the expert user flexibility and choice. Since moving to
Mac OS X recently myself, I can say that both offer an equally compelling
experience for all spectrums of users, regardless of computer literacy.

One of the major choices that Ubuntu has made in the past is which desktop
environment to present to the user. As far as I am aware, this has
historically always been GNOME (arguably Linux's most popular desktop
environment next to KDE), but recently Ubuntu have begun to build their own
desktop environment based on GNOME called Unity. This is now the defacto
desktop environment bundled with Ubuntu. This decision is the topic of
contension that was discussed at the CLUG meetup that I attended. I have
tried to capture the moment below.

### Story ###

The slow, grating ascent of the projector screen sliding into its resting
position behind speaker Phil Bull inspires awkwardness the likes of which
Ricky Gervais would be proud to have created. There is a palpable
anticipation in the air as we wait for the final few stragglers to arrive so
that Phil can start his presentation. During this time the awkwardness
subsides slightly as most of us settle into the comfortable seating of the
seminar room and descend into a world that consists of the content being
served up by our smartphones. This gives me reason to segue to an
interesting side note; the guy in front of me has an iPhone 4 which is
getting two bars of signal (albeit without applying the death grip). This,
in comparison to my 3GS's zero bars, down in the cozy recess of the Chemical
Engineering Building's Seminar Room at UCT is quite impressive.

OK, back on topic: the evening ahead is being discussed, and some of the
group are already planning to head out after the talk for food and beer to
carry on the conversation (which has yet to begin). An attendee rocks up in
a Darth Vader mask. I begin to wonder to myself if this is the accepted
modus operandi of choice for CLUG members. I can't help but smile as the
extent of the pure geekiness of the moment starts to sink in and it is at
this point that I'm glad to have discovered this group. I feel quite at
home. It's enjoyable to hunker down here in the back of the room tapping
away quietly on my phone trying to document the event. Being in a not too
sociable mood this evening doesn't appear to be an issue at all.

The talk begins and Phil Bull, an astrophysics PhD student from the
University of Cambridge introduces himself. The focus of the presentation is
on Phil's position in the community, which sees him torn between
contributing to either GNOME or Ubuntu's Unity as it is no longer
sustainable to do both given the two communities diverging ideologies.
During his presentation there are a few joking warnings from Phil that the
chosen content is not meant to entice a flame war (although I'm hoping to
some degree that it does).

One of Phil Bull's major concerns is for developers who are now offered a
splintered environment on which to develop as GNOME and Unity continue to
diverge. Phil is a documentation contributor for both projects, which gives
him a unique perspective on just how fractured the communities are becoming
and how hard it is going to be for developers to maintain applications that
work on both platforms.

The tone of the conversation paints a seemingly bleak future for Linux and
the user experience it offers to the end user, not to mention the
difficulties facing developers and other contributors looking to build on
the good work of others. It's fascinating to see that the open source world
is plagued by similar issues to those found in the commercial equivalent.

Phil's talk ends with a well deserved round of applause. He comes across as
an amicable person who is extremely passionate about what he does. He has a
genuine concern about the well being of all parties involved in this latest
open source conflict.

The time to grill the guest speaker arrives, and Phil is posed some
challenging questions. Of most interest to me is to find out which path will
he choose considering he made it clear that he can't work on both projects.
His decision
- GNOME. Sorry Canonical, but you seem to have lost a good man due to what
sounds like a spiteful insistence to split the efforts of the community.
Phil's explanation of Canonical's reasoning of their actions is called
into question. Some in the crowd are unsatisfied that the stated reasons
are all that explain Canonical's seemingly aggressive move.

It is at this point that things really become interesting. The man in the
Darth Vader mask pipes up before Phil has a chance to answer, quipping that
he might be better able to provide satisfactory answers. The Darth Vader
mask is removed to reveal none other than Mark Shuttleworth! My timing in
attending CLUG could not have been better. Or perhaps this is just a day in
the life of a CLUG member, because everyone seems to look suitably
unimpressed.

I should have clicked that something was strange about our Vader. The fancy
shirt, expensive watch and shiny cuff links (along with the olive
complexion) should have been a complete giveaway considering the topic of
discussion. The mask makes sense now. Not wanting to sway the direction of
Phil's talk with his presence, but still wanting to hear the thoughts of the
community, the mask was donned. It occurs to me that Shuttleworth's presence
is almost superhero like under the somewhat surreal circumstances.

Despite the heroic manner in which he appeared, people are not letting
Shuttleworth off lightly. He is being posed some very challenging questions
indeed, but does not miss a beat in answering any of them. The impression I
get from his answers is that they are all personal and not just a
representation of his company's position. He is questioned on many diverse
topics: the legal implications of the software licences that Canonical
employs (which seem to deprive contributors of their right to own the
intellectual property created by their contributions); his opinion on the
split in the community and why it came about; Canonicals apparent lack of
giving back to the community they are only too happy to take from; and many
others.

As I look upon the conversation as a completely neutral observer I notice
the dichotomy that exists between Shuttleworth and his contemporaries. The
personalities in the room could not be more polar in nature. Shuttleworth is
a powerhouse, full of confidence and conviction in what he is doing. His
peers are equally impassioned and intelligent, but Shuttleworth is
domineering. Not in a bad way. He just oozes confidence and belief in his
actions. Despite this observation, however, there does appear to exist an
internal conflict that Shuttleworth is battling. On the one hand he clearly
empathises with the people in the room, but on the other there is a clear
determination to follow through with his actions even though they may appear
to contrast his fundamental beliefs in what open source stands for.

As the debate rages I reflect on how incredibly smart and enthusiastic this
room of people are. Here I am, having fumbled my way into a seminar room at
the tip of Africa, which consists of one of the most influential people in
open source, battling it out against his equally bright and passionate
grassroots contemporaries. Although there are conflicting opinions and
seemingly unresolvable arguments, I feel safe in the knowledge that open
source can only become stronger with people of this calibre involved in its
creation and direction.

Although the debate may not have made perfect sense to me, it was
undoubtedly fascinating. Should you wish to find out more the fist place to
look for commentary would be the CLUG mailing list/website [insert link to
mailing list archive here] where the debate continues. Further information
on the topics discusses at CLUG during this presentation can be found here
[more linkage]. I would highly recommend attending a CLUG event if you
happen to live in Cape Town or are just visiting. The members are friendly
and the topics extremely interesting.

