# Developer Confidence
I have had an introspective last few weeks.

I was lucky enough to attend two really well put together conferences back to
back over the last couple of weeks. ScaleConf followed by Rubyfuza. Attending
these conferences was a great experience, however, I find that conferences tend
to play with my emotions somewhat. The reason I say this is that over the past
few weeks I have found that my confidence as a developer has been somewhat
dented having spent quite some time with some really talented individuals. The
confidence with which certain developers communicate and the level of
intellectualism (is that even a word) expressed by them greatly intimidates me
and I find I tend to enter my protective, little shell when attending such
events.

I have been reflecting on why I felt this way and haven't come up with too many
answers other than to grow a pair, but I do think that I have an approach that
might help in mitigating such feelings. Delivery.

Many developers talk with a great amount of confidence. Many great developers
seem to share this as a common trait. This is intimidating and I find it hard
to compete in this arena. However, it also seems like a general trend amongst
other developers less talented than the greats. So why not level the playing
field by letting your work speak for itself.

I believe that developer confidence can ultimately be improved through the
experience of delivery. Get your code out there. What's the worst that could
happen.

I often get caught up in perfection (or at least striving for it
unsuccessfully), but until I learn from my own mistakes through delivering, how
will I ever know I am getting closer to producing better code that I can be
proud of?

I think that as developers we should be well aware of the fact that ideas are
fairly worthless without execution. So don't worry too much about the details
of your execution. Don't get caught up in seeking perfection. Don't allow your
confidence to be knocked because you don't feel you can compete on an
intelectual level. Ultimately you are judged on what you produce and not
necessarily on how you produce it. So what are you waiting for. Ship!
