---
layout: post
title: Moving to Unboxed
---
Initial Post Idea
-----------------
So, where were we...?

Recently I have been contemplating the idea of writing a blog. For some time now
I have felt the urge to share some of my thoughts online, specifically around the
topic of web development. I have been unsure of how to add value by doing this,
however, and so have put it off for some time. As luck would have it though, I 
may have found a starting point for my initial foreigh into the world of online 
musings.

I have recently changed jobs. I now work for an agile web development company
called Unboxed Consulting. This change has been inspirational for a number of 
reasons. Before I get into these, perhaps let me provide some context to this
inspiration. 

My ultimate goal as a developer is to create something of value that has an 
aspect of uniqueness to it, but also fills an obvious gap that wasn't apparent 
until it was filled. I love the web and all the potential that I see in it and 
more and more I want to be a part of it. 

So back to inspiration, and what sparked it off. I will only touch on each
reason briefly as I'm sure I'll elaborate on them further in future posts.

Ruby on Rails
-------------
In terms of development, my only exposure to languages and frameworks thus far 
has been C# (and a bit of VB) and the .NET framework. When it was all I knew, I
really did enjoy working in an all Microsoft environment. Visual Studio 
is a great IDE and C# (especially coming from a VB background from early uni
days) was a comforting language to work with within the context of the .NET
framework, but this all feels very heavy now in comparison to developing a Ruby 
on Rails application.

The community
-------------
It has only been two months or so since venturing into Rails and already my
exposure to the community has been far greater than the equivalent in the MS
world. This can partly be attributed to my exuberance this time around in
comparison to learning C# and .NET, however, I have found it really easy to meet
fellow rubyists and other rails enthusiasts. I was even lucky enough to land a
job where two of the longest running ruby advocates in Cape Town happened to be
working. Through them I discovered that even Cape Town has its own Ruby crowd
who hold regular monthly meetups! I could go on a bit here, but suffice to say
the community is extremely helpful and enthusiastic.

Agile
-----
I come from a more traditional background of taking the waterfall approach to
software development. Certain agile practices may have been adopted at some
points, but I think I have come to the realisation that agile can only be
affective (and truly enlightening) when embraced 100%. I can see how easily it 
can be misunderstood and dismissed when making a half hearted attempt at it. I'm
sure it has it's drawbacks, but for now it seems to have far more points for
than against.

Behaviour Driven Development
----------------------------
I can't claim to fully understand this approach just yet, however, it's power is
immediately evident.

Mac
---
I'm a convert! After less than two months I'm infuriatingly pressing away at the 
Alt key on my Windows machine at home at every opportunity.

Vim!
----
I was mercilessly mocked for trying to learn Vim at my last job. Ok mercilessly
may be a bit of an exaggeration, however mockery definitely ensued. I now use
Vim as my primary development tool and I couldn't be happier :)

All of these things have contributed to the newly found excitement that I now
feel for development. 

I think this is a good time to start documenting my journey to become a decent
developer from someone who never believed that development was their calling. My
main aim is to keep a record for myself of this journey, but a secondary goal is
for this to perhaps provide some idea of what a journey like this may be like
for someone in a similar position. 

I will endeavour to not create a metablog, and to add my own insights as much as
possible whenever possible.
Another Post
